# Gliph

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/sdboyer/gliph.png?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/sdboyer/gliph)
[![Latest Stable Version](https://poser.pugx.org/sdboyer/gliph/v/stable.png)](https://packagist.org/packages/sdboyer/gliph)
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/sdboyer/gliph/badge.png?branch=master)](https://coveralls.io/r/sdboyer/gliph?branch=master)

Gliph is a **g**raph **li**brary for **PH**P. It provides graph building blocks
and datastructures for use by other PHP applications. It is (currently) designed
for use with in-memory graphs, not for interaction with a graph database like
[Neo4J](http://neo4j.org/).

Gliph aims for both sane interfaces and performant implementation - at least, as
performant as can be hoped for a PHP graph library. This does require knowing
enough about graphs to know what type is appropriate for your use case, but we
are aiming to provide helpers that simplify those choices.

## Core Concepts

Gliph has several components that work together: graph classes, algorithms, and
visitors. Generally speaking, Gliph is patterned after the [C++ Boost Graph
Library](http://www.boost.org/libs/graph/doc); reading their documentation can
yield a lot of insight into how Gliph is intended to work.

### Graphs

There are a number of different strategies for representing graphs; these
strategies are more or less efficient depending on certain properties the graph,
and what needs to be done to the graph. The approach taken in Gliph is to offer
a roughly consistent 'Graph' interface that is common to all these different
strategies. The strategies will have varying levels of efficiency at meeting
this common interface, so it is the responsibility of the user to select a graph
implementation that is appropriate for their use case. This approach draws
heavily from the [taxonomy of
graphs](http://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_54_0/libs/graph/doc/graph_concepts.html)
established by the BGL.

Gliph currently implements only an adjacency list graph strategy, in both
directed and undirected flavors. Adjacency lists offer efficient access to out-
edges, but inefficient access to in-edges (in a directed graph - in an
undirected graph, in-edges and out-edges are the same). Adjacency lists and are
generally more space-efficient for sparse graphs.

### Algorithms

Gliph provides various algorithms that can be run on graph objects. These
algorithms interact with the graph by making calls to methods defined in the
assorted Graph interfaces. If a graph implements the interface type-hinted by a
particular algorithm, then the algorithm can run on that graph. But the
efficiency of the algorithm will be largely determined by how efficiently that
graph implementation can meet the requirements of the interface. Adjacency
lists, for example, are not terribly efficient at providing a list of all edges
in a graph, but are very good at single-vertex-centric operations.

Gliph's algorithms are typically implemented quite sparsely (especially
traversers) - they seek to implement the simplest, most generic version of an
algorithm. They also may not return any output, as that work is left to
Visitors.

### Visitors

Most algorithms require a visitor object to be provided. The visitor conforms to
an interface specified by the algorithm, and the algorithm will call the visitor
at certain choice points during its execution. This allows the algorithms to
stay highly generic, while visitors can be tailored to a more specific purpose.

For example, a ```DepthFirst``` visitor might be used to calculate vertex reach,
or generate a topologically sorted list. Each of these are things that a depth-
first graph traversal can do. But the work of doing so is left to the visitor so
that only one traversal algorithm is needed, and that algorithm is as cheap
(memory and cycles) as possible.

## TODOs

Lots. But, to start with:

- Port to, or provide a parallel implementation in, PHP 5.5. Generators and non-
scalar keys from iterators make this all SO much better. In doing that, also
shift as much over to traits as possible.   (ONGOING in this branch)

- Implement a generic breadth-first algorithm and its corresponding visitors.

- Implement a generic iterative deepening depth-first algorithm, and its
corresponding visitors.

- Implement other popular connected components algorithms, as well as some
shortest path algorithms (starting with Dijkstra)

- Write up some examples showing how to actually use the library.

- Extend the ```DepthFirst::traverse()``` algorithm and
```DepthFirstVisitorInterface``` to allow the visitor to stop the traversal.
useful if, e.g., a search is being performed and the desired vertex has been
found.

## Acknowledgments

This library draws heavy inspiration from the [C++ Boost Graph Library](http://www.boost.org/libs/graph/doc).

## License

MIT
